# Record

<status>PAGE STATUS: draft</status>

A record is a datum within Mosaic. All datums are records.

## Notation

Byte slice notation `[m:n]` indicates the bytes including `m` up to and
including the byte `n-1` but not including the byte `n`. For example `[8:12]`
represents bytes 8, 9, 10 and 11.

Byte slices that are missing a beginning such as `[:64]` start at 0.

Byte slices that are missing an ending such as `[112:]` continue until the
end of the data.

## Maximum Size

The
<t>maximum size</t> [<sup>rat</sup>](rationale.md#maximum-size)
of a record is 1 mebibyte (1,048,576 bytes).


## Layout


```text
            1   2   3   4   4   5   6
    0   8   6   4   2   0   8   6   4
 0  +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 1/8                 |
 8  +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 2/8                 |
 16 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 3/8                 |
 24 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 4/8                 |
 32 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 5/8                 |
 40 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 6/8                 |
 48 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 7/8                 |
 56 +-------------------------------+
    | Signature 8/8                 |
 64 +-------------------------------+ <-----|
    | BE Timestamp           |  0   |
 72 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Hash 1/5                      |       |
 80 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Hash 2/5                      |  I    |
 88 +-------------------------------+  D    |
    | Hash 3/5                      |       |
 96 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Hash 4/5                      |       |
104 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Hash 5/5                      |       |
112 +-------------------------------+ <-----|
    | Signing public key, 1/4       |
120 +-------------------------------+
    | Signing public key, 2/4       |
128 +-------------------------------+
    | Signing public key, 3/4       |
136 +-------------------------------+
    | Signing public key, 4/4       |
144 +-------------------------------+ <-----|
    | Orig BE Timestamp     | Kind  |       |
152 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Nonce                         |   A   |
160 +-------------------------------+   D   |
    | Author public key, 1/4        |   D   |
168 +-------------------------------+   R   |
    | Author public key, 2/4        |   E   |
176 +-------------------------------+   S   |
    | Author public key, 3/4        |   S   |
184 +-------------------------------+       |
    | Author public key, 4/4        |       |
192 +-------------------------------+ <-----|
    | Flags | Timestamp             |
200 +-------------------------------+
    |AppFlgs| LenT  | LenP          |
208 +-------------------------------+
    | Tags...                       |
    |                   .. +PADDING |
  ? +-------------------------------+
    | Payload ...                   |
    |                   .. +PADDING |
  ? +-------------------------------+
```

[Rationale](rationale.md#layout)

## Fields

Records contain the following fields.

### Signature

64 bytes at `[0:64]`

The signature field is the EdDSA ed25519ph signature of the record
produced using the [construction](#construction) procedure.

### ID

A 48 byte ID from `[64:112]` made up of the following three parts.

#### Big-endian Timestamp

6 bytes from `[64:70]`

This is the timestamp, but in big-endian form.

This is the first part of the three-part ID.

#### Zeroes

2 bytes of zeroes from `[70:72]`.

This is the second part of the three-part ID.

### Hash

40 bytes at `[72:112]`

This is the first 40 bytes of the BLAKE3 hash.

This is the third part of the three-part ID.

#### Signing Public Key

32 bytes at `[112:144]`

This is the public key of the signing keypair, which is usually a subkey under
the author's master keypair (but theoretically could be delegated in some other
fashion in the future).

### Address

A 48 byte Address from `[144:192]` made up of the following four parts.

#### Orig BE Timestamp

6 bytes at `[144:150]`

This is the original timestamp represented in 6 bytes (48 bits) according
to [timestamps](timestamps.md), except in big-endian format, and also the
most significant bit is set to 1. [<sup>ref</sup>](rationale.md#address-fields)

If the record is not a replacement of another record (the usual case)
then this comes from the same value as [Timestamp](#timestamp).

#### Kind

2 bytes at `[150:152]`

This is the [kind](kinds.md) of the record which determines the application
this record is part of, which then determines the nature of the non-core tags
and the payload. This is represented as an unsigned integer in little-endian
format.

#### Nonce

8 bytes at `[152:160]` which are randomly generated by the author.
This keeps addresses unique.

#### Author Public Key

32 bytes at `[160:192]`

This is the identity of the author, expressed as a public key from their master
EdDSA ed25519 keypair.

### Flags

2 bytes at `[192:194]`

* `0x01 ZSTD` - The payload is compressed with Zstd
* `0x02 FROM_AUTHOR` - Servers SHOULD only accept the record from the author (requiring authentication)
* `0x04 TO_RECIPIENTS` - Servers SHOULD only serve the record to people tagged (requiring authentication)
* `0x08 NO_BRIDGE` - Bridges SHOULD NOT propogate the record to other networks (nostr, mastodon, etc)
* `0x10 EPHEMERAL` - The record is ephemeral; Servers should serve it to current subscribers and not keep it.
* `0x20 - RESERVED` and MUST be 0
* `0x80, 0x40` - Signature scheme:
    * `00 - EDDSA` - EdDSA ed25519 (default)
    * `01 - NOSTR` - reserved for secp256k1 Schnorr signatures (not in use)
    * `10 - RESERVED`
    * `11 - RESERVED`
    * NOTE: This only affects the signing key and the signature. The hash is
      always created with BLAKE3, and the master key is always EdDSA
      ed25519. This enables using nostr keys as subkeys (the records generated
      however will not interoperate with nostr-only software).
* All other bits - RESERVED and MUST be 0

### Timestamp

6 bytes at `[194:200]`

This is a timestamp represented in 6 bytes (48 bits) according to
[timestamps](timestamps.md).

If this record replaces a previous record, this timestamp MUST be larger
than [Orig Timestamp](#orig-be-timestamp).

### AppFlgs

2 bytes at `[200:202]`

These are bitflags reserved for use by the specific application based on
the [kind](#kind).

### LenT

2 bytes at `[202:204]` representing the length of the tags section in bytes
as an unsigned integer in little-endian format.

This represents the exact length of the tags section, not counting padding
at the end to achieve 64-bit alignment.

The maximum tags section length is 65536 bytes.

### LenP

4 bytes at `[204:208]` representing the length of the payload section in
bytes as an unsigned integer in little-endian format.

This represents the exact length of the payload section, not counting padding
at the end to achieve 64-bit alignment.

The maximum payload section length is 1_048_384 bytes (which is the maximum record
size minus the header size).

### Tags

Varying bytes at `[208:208+LenT]`

These are searchable key-value tags.

<t>Tags</t> [<sup>ref</sup>](rationale.md#tags)  are a maximum of 256 bytes long.

All tags are searchable on servers. If an application requires unsearchable tags,
these can be defined within that application's payload.

Tags are laid out as follows:

```text
0           2         3         256 max
+-----------+---------+----------+
| type      | length  | value ...|
+-----------+---------+----------+
```

Each tag has a 2-byte (16 bit) type `[0:2]`, a 1-byte (8 bit) length `[2:3]`,
and a value that is at most 253 bytes long `[3:]`.

Tags only have one value.

The tags section is padded out to 64-bit alignment.

The maximum tags section length is 65536 bytes.

Tag types are documented at the [Tag Type Registry](tag_types.md)
which includes the defined [Core Tags](core_tags.md).

### Payload

Varying bytes at `[208+LenT:208+LenT+LenP].`

Payload is opaque (at this layer of specification) application-specific data.

The payload section is padded out to 64-bit alignment.

The maximum payload section length is 1_048_384 bytes (which is the maximum record
size minus the header size).

# Construction

1. Fill in all the data from `[112:]`.
2. Take a BLAKE3 hash of `[112:]`, unkeyed, and extend to 64 bytes
   of output using BLAKE3's `finalize_xof()` function. This does not
   directly go into the record.
3. Generate EdDSA ed25519ph pre-hashed signature of that 512-bit hash
   using the Signing private key, and providing the context string
   of "Mosaic". NOTE: ed25519 calls for a SHA-512 hash, but we use
   a BLAKE3 hash instead. Place the signature at bytes `[0:64]`.
4. Copy the first 40 bytes of the hash to `[72:112]`.
5. Write the timestamp as a 48-bit unsigned big-endian to `[64:70]`.
6. Set bytes 70 and 71 to 0 (if not already).

# Validation

Records MUST be fully validated by clients.

Records MUST be fully validated by servers except for the
steps marked CLIENTS ONLY.

Validation steps

1. The length must be between 208 and 1048576 bytes.
2. The length must equal 208 + LenT + LenP.
3. The Signing public key must be validated according to the
   [cryptography](cryptography.md) key validation checks.
4. The Author public key must be validated according to the
   [cryptography](cryptography.md) key validation checks.
5. CLIENTS ONLY: The Signing public key must be verified to be
   a non-revoked subkey of the Author via the Author's
   [bootstrap](bootstrap.md).
6. Take a BLAKE3 hash of `[112:]`, unkeyed, and extend to
   64 bytes of output using BLAKE3's `finalize_xof()` function.
7. Verify the hash: Compare bytes `[0:40]` of this hash with bytes
   `[72:112]` of the record. They MUST match.
8. Verify the ID timestamp: bytes `[64:70]` taken as a big-endian
   48-bit unsigned integer must equal bytes `[194:200]` taken as a
   little-endian unsigned 48-bit integer.
9. Verify the signature: The signature must be a valid EdDSA ed25519
   signature of the full 64-byte BLAKE3 hash taken in step 6 with the
   signing public key.
10. The timestamp and the orig timestamp must be validated according to
    [timestamps](timestamps.md).
11. Bytes 70 and 71 must be 0.
12. Reserved flags must be 0.
13. CLIENTS ONLY: Application specific validation should be performed.
